---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: "Syntax Highlighting Test: TF2 Power Play"
description: I'm creating this document to test out the syntax highlighting feature with iA Writer. If the script improves from Grammarly's suggestions, then it's another reason to get it.
tags:
  - pain
date: 2021-09-30
---
# Syntax Highlighting Test: TF2 Power Play
I'm creating this document to test out the syntax highlighting feature with iA Writer. If the script improves from Grammarly's suggestions, then it's another reason to get it.

## Original Text
Now I know this kid wasn't intending to bring the whole TF2 community down with their exposé on the harassment they've received, but I think they accidentally sparked the perfect storm for that to potentially happen. Through misfortunate timing on their part from the announcement to the payload, a perfect weaponized meme was created to gather the community's attention. Also helps that it was sourced from a popular TF2 celebrity as well. The miswording and strange background also allowed for the unification of both the casual and competitive scenes to harass the ever-loving hell out of the kid. For those wondering why, both sides will have different reasons. The common trend between both of them, however, will be that Animesexual said they would single-handedly end TF2. Given that most people still playing are unable to play anything else, this activated a primordial response that the only thing that gives them joy was being attacked and they acted accordingly. Now while the exposé was your standard pedophilia affair, I believe the previous rage from the community turned the heat up when everything was revealed. Now TF2 has already been in a vulnerable state. The community is overall a cesspool, the competitive scene is a stagnating authoritarian chore, and casual has been automated. That last point is critical for anyone wanting to play the game. Currently, FACEIT's casual system is showing promise, but depending on things play out FACEIT could pull the plug and back out of TF2 completely. All hands are on deck for whether or not TF2 will finally bite the dust.

## Syntax Highlighting Edit
While this kid wasn't intending wreck the TF2 community with an exposé on their harassment, they sparked the storm for that to happen. Through the timing of the announcement to the payload, this meme gathered the community's attention with help from a TF2 celebrity. The miswording and background of the origin allowed for the unification of the casual and competitive scenes, who decided to harass the kid. Both sides have different reasons for why, but the common ground is Animesexual saying they would single-handedly end TF2. Given that the community plays nothing else, this activated a primordial response to defend the only thing that gives them joy. While the exposé was your standard pedophilia affair, I believe the rage from the community turned the heat up when everything was revealed. TF2 has already been in a vulnerable state. The community is a cesspool, the competitive scene is stagnating, and casual has been automated. That last point is critical for anyone who has wanted to play the game. FACEIT's casual system shows promise, but they could back out of TF2 as they have done before. All hands are on deck for whether TF2 will bite the dust.

### Filtering back through Grammarly
When the kid "threatened" the TF2 community with an exposé on their harassment, they sparked the storm for chaos. Through the announcement's timing to the payload, this meme hooked the community's attention. The miswording and background of the origin allowed for the unification of the casual and competitive scenes, who decided to harass the kid. Both sides have different reasons, but the common ground is Animesexual saying they would single-handedly end TF2. Given that the community plays nothing else, this activated a primordial response to defend the only thing that gives them joy. While the exposé was your standard pedophilia affair, I believe the rage from the community turned the heat up. TF2 has already been in a vulnerable state. The community is a cesspool, the competitive scene is stagnating, and casual is automated. That last point is critical for anyone who has wanted to play the game. FACEIT's matchmaking system shows promise, but they could back out of TF2 as they have done before. All hands are on deck for whether TF2 will bite the dust.

## Conclusion
Comparing to the original text, iA Writer really did improve things. Premium Grammarly errors went from 23 down to just 9, which shows just how much simplifying your text can do for you. There were still some things that Grammarly was able to refine, but it could be that Style Check would have caught those errors.